## Introduction {.page_break_before}

Despite technological advances, major challenges remain to understand biological and biomedical systems [@gallagher-infinite;@dl-bioscience].
We measure more and more data points with ever-increasing resolution to such a degree that their analysis and interpretation have become the bottleneck for their exploitation [@dl-bioscience].
One reason for this challenge may be the inherent limitation of human knowledge [@doi:10.1016/j.tics.2005.04.010]: Even seasoned domain experts cannot know the implications of every gene, molecule, symptom, or biomarker.
In addition, biological events are context-dependent, for instance with respect to a cell type or specific disease.

Large Language Models (LLMs) of the current generation, on the other hand, can access enormous amounts of knowledge, encoded (incomprehensibly) in their billions of parameters [@doi:10.48550/arxiv.2204.02311;@doi:10.48550/arxiv.2201.08239;@doi:10.48550/arxiv.2303.08774].
Trained correctly, they can recall and combine virtually limitless knowledge from their training set.
ChatGPT has taken the world by storm, and many biomedical researchers already use LLMs in their daily work, for general as well as research tasks [@doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06792-0;@doi:10.1101/2023.04.16.537094;@doi:10.1038/s41587-023-01789-6].
However, the current, predominantly manual, way of interacting with LLMs is virtually non-reproducible, and their behaviour can be erratic.
For instance, they are known to confabulate: they make up facts as they go along, and, to make matters worse, are convinced - and convincing - regarding the truth of their confabulations [@doi:10.1038/s41586-023-05881-4;@doi:10.1038/s41587-023-01789-6].
While current efforts towards Artificial General Intelligence manage to ameliorate some of the shortcomings by ensembling multiple models [@{https://python.langchain.com}] with long-term memory stores [@{https://autogpt.net/}], the current generation of AI does not inspire adequate trust to be applied to biomedical problems without supervision [@doi:10.1038/s41586-023-05881-4].
Additionally, biomedicine demands greater care in data privacy, licensing, and transparency than most other real-world issues [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.2401.05654].

Computational biomedicine involves many tasks that could be assisted by LLMs, such as the interpretation of experimental results, the design of experiments, the evaluation of literature, and the exploration of web resources.
To improve and accelerate these tasks, we have developed BioChatter, a platform for communicating with LLMs specifically tuned to biomedical research (Figure @fig:overview).
The platform guides the human researcher intuitively through the interaction with the model, while counteracting the problematic behaviours of the LLM.
Since the interaction is mainly based on plain text (in any language), it can be used by virtually any researcher.

<!-- Figure 1 -->
![
**The BioChatter composable platform architecture (simplified).**
Many questions arise in daily biomedical research practice, for instance, interpretation of experimental results or the use of a web resource (top left).
BioChatter’s main response circuit (blue) composes a number of specifically engineered prompts and passes them (and a conversation history) to the primary LLM, which generates a response for the user based on all inputs.
This response is simultaneously used to prompt the secondary circuit (orange), which fulfils auxiliary tasks to complement the primary response.
In particular, using search, the secondary circuit queries a database as a prior knowledge repository and compares annotations to the primary response, or uses the knowledge to perform Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).
A knowledge graph such as BioCypher [@biocypher] can similarly serve as knowledge resource or long-term memory extension of the model.
Further, an independent LLM receives the primary response for fact-checking, which can be supplemented with context-specific information by a RAG process.
The platform is composable in most aspects, allowing arbitrary extensions to other, specialised models for additional tasks orchestrated by the primary LLM.
](images/biochatter_overview.png "Overview"){#fig:overview}
